APPARATUS FOR OBTAINING THE CUBATURE OF TREES.
In the exploitation of forests it is an important matter to be able to measure the cubature of trees, and the process most generally employed consists in determining their height and mean circumference, the apparatus used for this latter measurement being compasses having the form of the calipers used by mechanics. The figure indicated is read upon the graduated rule and is called off in a loud voice to another person, who at once writes it down. There are several causes of error: it is possible that the reading may be incorrectly made or improperly called off, or be misunderstood or incorrectly noted. Finally, it is a somewhat fatiguing operation that is often dispensed with and the measurement made by estimate. In order to do away with all such causes of error, M. Jobez, a mining engineer, has had M. Peccaud construct an apparatus that automatically registers all the measurements upon a paper tape analogous to that used in the Morse telegraphic apparatus.

The registering mechanism (Fig. 1) is fixed to the movable branch that forms the slide of the instrument. It is so arranged that when this branch is slid along the rule carrying the graduations, a gearing causes the revolution of a wheel, D, which carries figures corresponding to such graduation. At the same time, two feed rollers, E, cause a small portion of the paper tape (which is wound upon a spool, A) to move forward and wind around a receiving spool, B. After the apparatus has been made accurately to embrace the trunk of the tree to be measured, it is removed and a pressure given to the lever, H, which applies the paper to the type wheel, D. A special button permits, in addition, of making a dot alongside of the numbers, if it be desired to attract attention to one of the measurements, either for distinguishing one kind of a tree from another or for any other reason.

With this apparatus one man can make all the measurements and inscribe them without any possible error and without any fatigue. It is possible for him to inscribe a thousand numbers an hour, and the tapes are long enough to permit of 4,000 measurements being made without a change of paper. There is, therefore, a saving of time as well as perfect accuracy in the operation.

In order to make the calculations necessary for the estimate, M. Laurand has devised a sliding rule which facilitates the operation and which is based upon the method that consists in knowing the height and mean circumference of the tree. The circumference taken in the middle is divided by 4, 4.8 or 5 according as one employs the quarter without deduction or the sixth or fifth deduced. This first result, multiplied by itself and by the height, gives the cubature of the tree. As for the value, that is the product of this latter number by the price per cubic meter. It will be seen that there is a series of somewhat lengthy operations to be performed, and it is in order to dispense with these that has been constructed the rule under consideration, which, like all calculating rules, consists of two parts, one of which slides upon the other (Fig. 2). Upon each of these there are two graduated scales, or four in all, the first of which is designed for the circumference and the second for the height of the tree, the third for the price of the cubic meter and the fourth for the total result, that is, the value of the entire tree. The arrangements are such that, after the number corresponding to the circumference of the tree has been brought opposite that corresponding to its height, the result will be found opposite the price per cubic meter.

Thus, in the position represented in the figure, we may suppose a tree having a circumference of 2.5 m. and a height of 3.2 m.; then, if a cubic meter is worth 25 francs, the tree will be worth 20 francs.

In order to simplify the calculations and the construction of the rule, no account is taken of points; but this is of no importance, since the error that might be made in misplacing one would be so great that it would be immediately detected. A 2 franc tree would not be confounded with a 20 or a 200 franc one. As an approximation, the first two figures of the result are obtained accurately; and that suffices, because, since the whole is based upon an approximate measurement, which is the mean circumference of the tree, we cannot exact absolute precision in the results. The essential thing is to have a practically acceptable figure.
